# ridl - retargetable IDL compiler

`ridl` (pronounced _riddle_) is an _Interface Description Language_
compiler. Of sorts. Compared with other tools that call themselves IDL
compilers `ridl` stands out. Firstly because it does not use an
interface definition language. And secondly because it doesn't
actually _compile_ anything. ridl is an an _IDL compiler_. With no
IDL. That it doesn't compile.

## What ridl does

Instead of defining an IDL `ridl` uses an existing language, Go, and
re-interprets its constant and type declarations to be definitions of
_interfaces_ (which, of course, they already are). `ridl` parses Go
code, using standard Go packages, builds a data structure to represent
the constants and types the code defines, and then uses Go's standard
template package to _execute_ user-supplied templates with this data
structure as the so-called _template context_. The result permits the
Go declarations to transformed to whatever is produced by the
templates.

ridl comes with example templates to convert Go declarations to C++.
These will be developed to allow for network messaging, using
different transports, with Go interface types defining sets of
messages.


## What ridl doesn't

Using Go as the definition language means ridl is restricted to what
Go's type specifications can express.  That means there are no unions,
also called _variant records_, _sum types_ or _enums_ in some
languages. There is no direct support for interface versioning and no
support for the direct expression of enumerated values a la C/C++.

Unions and versioning are left to end-users however ridl does
recognize the idiomatic Go way of defining C-style enumerated types
and generates a data model that allows templates to "undo" the
Go-style representation.

## License

The RIDL (Go) source code is distributed under the GPLv2 license.  Refer to
the file, LICENSE, for details. Code generated by RIDL is NOT covered
by any license.

RIDL template files are distributed under the MIT license and may be freely
used for any purpose. The template files distributed with RIDL are primarily
intended to serve as tests and examples and user-created templates derived
from these are NOT covered by the RIDL copyright.

The real intent is that RIDL template files would be distributed without
license if that were permitted in all locations.

## Interface Descriptions

A ridl interface description is a Go package containing only constant and type
declarations, i.e. there are no functions. By convention these are named with
a `.ridl` extension but the file is a `.go` file and can be processed by
standard Go tools.

Like Go, or more correctly because of it, `ridl` has a module system
based upon _packages_.  Each interface belongs to a package and an
interface must declare its pacakge as its first statement (ridl *is*
go).

Packages may be used in template expansion. The C++ template uses the
Go package to name a C++ namespace.

## Invoking `ridl`

Basic usage is,

`ridl` _options_ _[_ _filename... _]_

If no input files are named on the command line `ridl` reads all files
with the extension `.ridl` in the current directory.  If one, or more,
files are named on the command line only those files are processed.

### Options
- -t _template_  
Use _template_ to generate output.  More than one template may be used
in which case 
- -o _filename_  
Write output to _filename_.  The _filename_ `-` represents the
standard output.
- -D _directory_  
Read template files from _directory_.
- -typemap _filename_  
Read type map definitions from _filename_. See **Type Maps* below.
- -write-typemap  
Output the JSON-encoded type map to stdout and exit.
- -version  
Output ridl version and exit.
- -debug  
Enable debug output.

## Interface Types

`ridl`, or more correctly the supplied C++ template file, interprets a
Go `interface` type as the definition of a set of messages. Each
method represents a distinct _message_ with the interface where a
method's name identifies the message within the interface.  Any
arguments to the method define the message _payload_, the data
communicated to the receiver along with the message identity.  If the
method has results they define the payload of a _result_ message
(who's identity is derived from the method name).

## Arrays, Slices and Maps

Arrays, slice and map types may be used. They are easily mapped to
some appropriate construct in most target languages.

## `error`

Go's `error` type is permitted and is mapped to whatever
representation of errors is used with the target language.

The error type's interface is limited, only permitting extracting the
error as a string, so ridl defines errors as string.

## Restrictions

Function, channel and pointer types are not permitted.

Function declarations are by default errors. A _permissive_ mode could
be used to parse Go files and ignore constructs not permitted in ridl
files.

## Templates

### Template Context

#### Meta-data
- PackageName  
The name of the (Go) ridl package being processed.
- RidlVersion  
The version of ridl being used.
- Directory  
The name of the directory being processed.
- Filenames  
The names of the .ridl files being processed.
- BuildTime  
The (system) time when template generation started.
- Username  
The name of the user running ridl.
- Hostname  
The name of the host on which ridl is being run.

#### Declarations

- Decls  
All declarations - constants, types and interfaces.
- Imports  
The names of any imported packages
- Typedefs  
The _basic_ types defined by the ridl files.
- ArrayTypes  
The array and slice (variable size arrays).
- MapTypes  
The defined map types.
- StructTypes  
The defined struct types.
- Interfaces  
The interfaces.
- Constants  
All constants.
- Enums  
Constants that are _enum like_.
- NotEnums  
Constants that are not _enum like_.

### Output File Naming

Each template may define an _output spec_ which is used to
generate the name of the output file created when that template is
used. An output spec is defined via special comment forms embedded
in the template, so called _ridl comments_.

Ridl comments are `//` style _line comments_ that:

1. begin at the start of the line (i.e. the first column)
2. have a first, space-separated, token of "ridl:"

The ridl `output` comment is used to define the so-called _output specification_.
A `text/template` template used to generate the name of the output
file created by a template.

The specification is evaluated with a _context_ defining a number of
variables:

- Template  
The name of the template being processed.
- Package  
The name of the package being processed.
- Directory  
The directory being processed.
- Time  
Time of processing.
- Username  
Name of the user running ridl.
- Hostname  
Name of the host on which ridl is being run.

### Template Functions

#### argtype
Returns a string with the C++ type corresponding to the given Go
type when a value of that type is used an argument to a function.
#### basename
Returns the base filename for a given pathname **without** any
extension.
#### cpptype
Returns a string with the C++ type corresponding to the given
Go type.
#### isslice
Determines if a Go type is a slice, i.e. if the Go type name
starts with the sequence `[]`.
#### tolower
Returns the lower case version of a string.
#### plus
Returns the sum of two integers.
#### eltype
Returns the element type of an array or slice type.
#### restype
Returns the C++ type to be used as a function result.
#### dims
TBD.
#### decap
Converts any leading capital letter in a string to lower case.
#### deref
Removes any leading `*` from a string, typically a TypeName value.
#### ispointer
Returns true if the argument type is a Go pointer type.

### Type Maps

The `cpptype` template function maps a Go type to an equivalent C++
type. Standard Go types are mapped as per the following table,

| Go Type   | C++ Type             |
|:----------|:---------------------|
| byte      | std::byte            |
| error     | std::runtime\_error  |
| string    | std::string          |
| float32   | float                |
| float64   | double               |
| rune      | uint32\_t            |
| bool      | bool                 |
| int       | int                  |
| uint      | unsigned int         |
| float     | float32              |
| int8      | int8\_t              |
| uint8     | uint8\_t             |
| int16     | int16\_t             |
| uint16    | uint16\_t            |
| int32     | int32\_t             |
| uint32    | uint32\_t            |
| int64     | int64\_t             |
| uint64    | int64\_t             |
| uintptr   | ptrdiff\_t           |
| complex32 | std::complex<float>  |
| complex64 | std::complex<double> |

Note, the `int` and `float` Go types represent the types of the so-called
_untyped constants_.

Users may override the default mapping or define extra mappings via a _type
map file_, a JSON encoded structure that defines the mapping from a Go type
to a C++ type.

A type map contains a, JSON, array of mappings where each mapping is a
dictionary the the keys

- `go-type`  
the type's name as used in Go
- `cpp-type`  
the corresponding C++ type name
- `pass-by-ref`  
a flag indicating if values of the type should be passed by reference


```json
[
    {
        "go-type": "Timepoint",
        "cpp-type": "std::chrono::steady_clock::timepoint",
        "pass-by-ref": false
    },
    {
        "go-type": "StringMap",
        "cpp-type": "std::map<std::string, std::string>",
        "pass-by-ref": true
    }
]
```

The `-write-typemap` flag can be used to output the default, JSON-encoded,
type map which may be used to tailor the desired type map.
